Let's now display the frontend of a widget and this should be the easiest part in the widget creation.
So we have the
widget() function here. And this function is responsible for displaying the frontend of widget.
And we mentioned that we have the $args and the $args will contain what we will have to display before
the title, after title, before the widget and after the widget.
So we will have to use these values.
And it also contains the $instance which will contain the values that we typed here.
Right?
So we have everything we need. Let's start coding.
Let's remove this "echo" and this var_dump(). The first thing we have to do is "echo " and then "$args" and "before_widget",
right? So here in our primary sidebar we specified that we want a SECTION tag before our widget.
So let's add it.
And let's also add the "after_widget".
And now let's display the title.
So let's also check if is_set()
and then the "title" inside the $instance.
So you might think why do we have to check.
We already, we are already sure that we have a title inside of the instance because we already saved
our widget and we included a title.
But what if you made an update to your theme and you added a new option in your widget, a new field and
your theme users already have instances of your widget that they created before this update.
So let's say your widget did not have a title before and then you made an update and added the title
and use it like so, "echo $instance['title']" before checking is_set().
And let's say you have a user that already created an instance of your widget before this update without
having the title field before.
Now when he runs your new code
he will try to access the title inside of the $instance but it will not exist. It will display an
error because this user did not save your widget after the new update, right?
So I hope I'm making sense.
So anyways it's always a good idea to check is_set() first. And then if so we need to echo the title, right?
But before echoing the title
there is another thing that you have to do. So let's create a variable called $title and normally this should
be the "title" in the $instance. But actually there is a WordPress filter called "widget_title" that can filter
widget title. And you want to make sure that this filter is applied before displaying your title.
So what we can do is, we can call it apply_filters(). And then apply the "widget_title" filter to the "title"
in your $instance.
So this way if some developer used this "widget_title" filter it will be applied to your widget.
Right?
And then finally we have to echo the $title.
But remember we will also have to echo before and after the title.
So this will be "$args['before_title']" and also "after_title".
And finally remember we mentioned before that, before outputting any variables that you get from the user
you should escape. So let's escape the title.
And let's try it out
now.
So we've our titles and they are wrapped in the H5 and then the SECTION tags.So great.
But what if we have an empty title.
Let's save and refresh. We'll have an empty H5 tag and we don't need that.
If the title is empty we don't need to display the title at all, right?
So in addition to this if condition, this is_set() check, we can also check that the title is not empty.
So is_set() will check that the title key exists in the $instance array is_empty() will check that the "title"
key in the $instance array is not an empty string, right? So let's save.
And now we don't have our title. We don't have any H5 tags. Great. So let's output the post. So remember when
we mention that we have a class called WP_Query that we can use in order to get some posts from the
database.
Let's now use this class.
So let's create a new variable called maybe $most_recent_query.
And let's instantiate a new WP_Query class.
It's the "WP" and "_query". And it takes an array of arguments and these arguments will
let you filter these posts in a lot of ways.
So in our case we need to change the number of posts and the order, right.
So let's first specify the "post_type".
We only need posts, so "post". For the number of posts we can add an argument called "post_per_page". And we need
to get the value from the $instance, right?
But first we need to check is_set($instance['post_count']".
So if so we will output this.
But make sure it's parse to an integer so intval().
Otherwise maybe default it to 3, right?
Next we have the "orderby". We called it "sort_by" it's actually called "orderby" in the WP_Query class. So
is_set() and then "sort_by", we'll output it but sanitized.
So let's copy it from here.
Otherwise maybe default it to "date".
And now we will loop through the posts that this query found.
So "if ($most_recently_query->have_posts())" let's echo a
maybe a DIV, a container for the post
and close it. And then loop through the posts using while loop.
So while have  posts, let's call the_post() function.
And then for each post we need to echo
maybe also a div, so let's.
And inside of this DIV let's echo the title and the date.
So I added a H6 tag with the URL and the title.
Let's also add, remember we have an option called "include_date",
right? So let's check "$instance['include_date']". And if "include_date" is "true"
let's output get_the_date(),
otherwise let's output nothing.
So I think that will be fine.
Let's take a look.
And undefined,
ok. You know that kind of stuff happens when you copy paste things.
Let's change this to $instance instead of $new_instance.
So I think the "post_count" is not working.
Let's see this one, the first one, we set it to 3. And it's actually getting a lot of posts. So let's take a look.
All right so
this is "posts_per_page" not "post_per_page", sorry. And now it should be working fine.
So it's 4 not 3 because there is a sticky post. If you would like to ignore sticky posts,
we can add an argument here
called ignore_sticky_posts and set it to "true". It's now we have 3 posts and let's try to
include date
and maybe change this to random.
So now we've our dates and if you refresh every time the order will be random. You'll get some random posts.
So great I think that will be it for our widget.
Let's finally take a look at how out widget will look like in the Customizer in the next lecture.